ADR for KaaS Observability Architecture and MVP-0 (#394)
SovereignCloudStack/standards: Standards/scs-0403-v1-csp-kaas-observability-stack.md

2. Logs: Messages of software events during runtime
3. Traces: More developer oriented form of logging to provide insights to an application or to analyze request flows in distributed systems.

Based on those data, an alerting system can be used to to send out notifications to an Operations Team if a system behaves abnormally. Base on the telemetry data the Operations Team can find the issue, work on it and mitigate future incidents.

## Motivation

Currently, only the IaaS Layer of the SCS Reference Implementation has a an Observability Stack consisting of tools like Prometheus, Grafana, and Alertmanager as well as several Exporters toextract monitoring data from the several OpenStack components and additional software that is involved in the Reference Implementation. As the Kubernetes as a Service Layer becomes more and more important and the work on the Cluster API approach to create customer clusters progresses further, an observability solution for this layer is also needed. CSP should be able to watch over customer clusters and intervene if cluster get in a malfunctioning state. For this, a toolset and architecture is need which is proposed in this ADR.

## Requirements

> A survey was conducted to gather the needs and requirements of a CSP when providing Kubernetes as a Service. The results of the Survey (Questions with answers) were the following:

Reviewer: I understood the  Survey more as hints for the requirements definition. 
IMO the ADR requirements section should not contain the QA blocks that contain e.g. `Do you have an observabiltiy infrastructure, if yes, how it is built` 

I would like to suggest re-format this section e.g. as follows:

KaaS observability solution SHOULD gather the following metrics ... 

KaaS observability solution SHOULD define alerts based on collected metrics ...

Author: I rewrote the requirements section and put the survey results as reference to the end.

    - Metrics of underlying node
    - Logs of control plane, kubelet and containerd

5. Must Not haves
    - Secrets, otherwise as much as possible for anomaly detection over long time data

6. Must have Alerts
    - Dependent on SLAs and SLA Types, highly individual
    - Use of [kubernetes-mixin alerts](https://github.com/kubernetes-monitoring/kubernetes-mixin/tree/master/alerts) and [dNation Alerts Ruleset](https://github.com/dNationCloud/kubernetes-monitoring/tree/main/jsonnet/rules)

7. Must NOT Alert on
    - Should not wake people, nothing that does not lead to Action items

8. Observability from Within Or Outside KaaS. How does the architecture look like?
    - Monitoring Infra on CSP Side
    - Data from Customer Clusters and Mon Infra on CSP and KaaS, get both data. KaaS Monitoring can also be used by customer

9. Special Constraints
    - HA Setup in different Clusters on Different Sites

## Design Considerations

As the software components involved for the Observability solution were clear as Prometheus, Thanos, Loki, Promtail, Grafana, and Alertmanager are the industry standard tools to implement a observability solution in a Cloud-Native fashion on Kubernetes.

> The important question is how those tools are utilize and combined to an architecture to provide the needs stated in the requirements above. As dNation has a comprehensive observability system using the aforementioned tools as well as a set of dynamic dashboards. We decided on in the SIG Monitoring and Team Ops meetings that we want to leverage their toolbox as we don't wanted to start on a green field and the tooling is already available as Open Source Software. Their observability Stack is mainly used to observe several customer clusters and customer applications which includes all observability data that is needed. Typically those clusters are set up for the customer beforehand and the observability tools are installed for customer manually.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The important question is how those tools are utilized and combined to an architecture to provide the needs stated in the requirements above. As dNation has a comprehensive observability system using the aforementioned tools as well as a set of dynamic dashboards. We decided on in the SIG Monitoring and Team Ops meetings that we want to leverage their toolbox as we don't wanted to start on a green field and the tooling is already available as Open Source Software. Their observability Stack is mainly used to observe several customer clusters and customer applications which includes all observability data that is needed. Typically those clusters are set up for the customer beforehand and the observability tools are installed for customers manually.
```

For use of a CSP that provides Kubernetes as a Service the provisioning of the observability tools and the onboarding of a customer cluster need to be fully automated. For a customer, all the tools on their Kubernetes cluster needs to be installed at creation time and the observability data of that cluster needs to present in the Observer Cluster immediately.

### Options considered

#### Short Term Query Architecture

In this setup, each customer cluster have Thanos and Prometheus installed in addition to Thanos and Prometheus on the Observer Cluster. The customer clusters Thanos installation is used for short term queries, as for long term queries the data of all Thanos instances are stored in an external Object Store of the CSP.

#### Hybrid Approach (query for short term metrics & remote write of metrics for KaaS)

Here, Thanos and Prometheus are only used on the CSP side to store and manage all observability data. For the customer clusters only the Prometheus Agent will be used. This introduces less complexity and resource consumption on the customer workload clusters.

#### Scope of the Observability Architecture

> The Observability Cluster and Archtiecture should be defined such that it can be used to not only observe the Kubernetes Layer of an SCS Stack, but also the IaaS and other Layers.

Author: I rewrote the section to make more clear, that the Observer Cluster should also be usable as a Observability System for the complete SCS Stack.
